good morning good morning everybody
everybody please have a seat have a seat
well on behalf of Michelle and myself
welcome to the White House this is one
of my favorite events every year
especially special this year as I look
at this extraordinary group of
individuals and our opportunity to honor
them with our nation's highest civilian
honor the Presidential Medal of Freedom
and this year it's just a little more
special because this marks the 50th
anniversary of President Kennedy
establishing this award we're honored by
the way today to have with us one of my
favorite people Ethel Kennedy and a
pretty good basketball player of
President Kennedy's grandson Jack
now this medal has been bestowed on more
than 500 deserving people tonight I'm
looking forward to joining some of these
honorees as well as members of the
Kennedy family as we pay tribute to
these 50 years of excellence and this
morning were honored to add 16 new names
to this distinguished list today we
salute fierce competitors who became
true champions in the sweltering heat of
a Chicago summer Ernie Banks walked into
the Cubs locker room and didn't like
what he saw everybody was sitting around
heads down to press he recalled so Ernie
piped up and said boy what a great day
let's play - that's mr. cub the man who
came up through the Negro Leagues making
seven dollars a day and became the first
black player to suit up for the Cubs and
one of the greatest hitters of all time
and in the process Ernie became known as
much for his 512 home runs as for his
cheer and his optimism and his eternal
faith that someday the Cubs would go all
the way
and that's that serious belief that is
something that even the white sox fan
like me can respect but he is just a
wonderful man and a great icon of my
hometown speaking of sports Dean Smith
is one of the winningest coaches in
college basketball history but his
successes go far beyond X's and O's even
as he won 78 percent of his games he
graduated 96 percent of his players the
first coach to use multiple defenses and
again he was the pioneer who popularized
the idea of pointing to the passer after
a basket player should point to the
teammate who passed them the ball and
with his first national title on the
line he did have the good sense to give
the ball to a 19 year old kid named
Michael Jordan although they used to
joke that the only person who ever held
Michael under 20 was Dean Smith while
coach Smith couldn't join us today to
Anne
due to an illness that he's facing with
extraordinary courage we also honor his
courage in helping to change our country
he recruited the first black scholarship
athlete to North Carolina
and helped integrate a restaurant and a
neighborhood in Chapel Hill that's the
kind of character that he represented on
and off the court we salute innovators
who push the limits of science changing
how we see the world and ourselves and
growing up Sally Ride read about the
space program
in the newspaper almost every day and
she thought this was the coolest thing
around when she was a PhD candidate at
Stanford she saw an ad for astronauts in
the student newspaper and she sees the
opportunity as the first American woman
in space Sally didn't just break the
stratospheric glass ceiling she blasted
through it and when she came back to
earth
she devoted her life to helping girls
excel in fields like math science and
engineering young girls need to see role
models she said you can't be what you
can't see today our daughters including
Malia and Sasha can
set their sights a little bit higher
because Sally Ride showed them the way
now all of us have moments when we look
back and wonder what the heck was I
thinking I have that quite a bit
psychologist Daniel Kahneman has made
that simple question his life's work in
a storied career in Israel in America he
basically invented the study of human
decision-making he's helped us to
understand everything from behavioral
economics to does living in California
make people happy it's an interesting
question
he's also been called an expert on
irrational behavior so I'm sure that he
could shed some light on Washington but
what truly sets Daniel apart is his
curiosity guided by his belief that
people are endlessly complicated and
interesting at 79 he's still discovering
new insights into how we think and learn
not just so we understand each other but
so we can work and live together more
effectively dr. Mario Molina's love of
science started as a young boy in Mexico
City in a homemade laboratory in a
bathroom at home and that passion for
discovery led Mario to become one of the
most respected chemists of his era he
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize or the
Nobel Prize rather not only for his
path-breaking research but also for his
insistence that when we ignore dangerous
carbon emissions we risk destroying the
ozone layer and endangering our planet
and thanks to Mario's work the world
came together to address a common threat
and today inspired by his example were
working to leave our planet safer and
cleaner for future generations we also
have to salute musicians who bring such
joy to our lives
Loretta Lynn was 19 the first time she
won the big she won big at the local
fair her canned vegetables brought home
17 blue ribbons
and made her canner of the year where is
it now that's impressive for a girl from
butcher holler Kentucky that was fain
fortunately for all of us she decided to
try her hand at things other than
canning her first guitar cost $17 and
with it
this Coal Miner's Daughter gave voice to
a generation singing what no one wanted
to talk about and saying what no one
wanted to think about and now over 50
years after she cut her first record in
canned her first vegetables Loretta Lynn
still reigns as the rule-breaking
record-setting queen of country music as
a young man in Cuba Arthur O son de la
loved jazz so much it landed him in jail
it was the Cold War and the only radio
station where he could hear jazz was the
voice of America which was dangerous to
listen to but our total listened anyway
later he defected to the United States
knowing he might never see his parents
or beloved homeland again without
freedom he said there is no life and
today Arturo is an American citizen and
one of the most celebrated trumpet
players in the world there isn't any
place on earth where the people don't
know about jazz he says and that's true
in part because musicians like him have
sacrificed so much to play we salute
pioneers who pushed our nation towards
greater justice and equality a Baptist
minister Ct Vivian was one of dr. Martin
Luther King Jr's closest advisors Martin
taught us he says that it's in the
action that we find out who we really
are
and time and again Reverend Vivian was
among the first to be in the action in
1947 joining a sit-in to integrate an
Illinois restaurant one of the first
Freedom Riders in some on the course had
steps to register blacks to vote for
which he was beaten bloodied and jailed
Rosa Parks said of him
even after things had supposedly been
taken care of and we had our rights he
was still out there inspiring the next
generation including me helping kids go
to college with a program that would
become Upward Bound and at 89 years old
reven Vivian is still out there still in
the action pushing us closer to our
founding ideals early in the morning the
day of the march on Washington the
National Mall was far from full and some
in the press were began to wonder if the
event would be a failure but the marches
chief organizer Beier Weston didn't
panic as the story goes he looked down
at a piece of paper look back up and
reassured reporters that everything was
right on schedule
the only thing those reporters didn't
know was that the paper he was holding
was blank he didn't know how it was
going to work out but Meyer had an
unshakable optimism nerves of steel and
most importantly a faith that if the
cause is just and people are organized
nothing can stand in our way for decades
this great leader often at dr. King's
side was denied his rightful place in
history because he was openly gay no
medal can change that but today we honor
by Ruston's memory by taking our place
in his march towards true equality no
matter who we are or who we love
speaking of game-changers disruptors
there's a young girl named Gloria
Steinem who arrived in New York to make
her mark as a journalist and magazines
only wanted to write articles like how
to cook without really cooking for men
Gloria notice things like that she's
been called The Champion notice her
she's alert to all the ways large and
small that women had been and in some
cases continue to be treated unfairly
just because they're women there's a
writer the speaker an activist she
awakened a vast and often skeptical
public to problems like domestic
violence a lack of affordable childcare
unfair hiring practices because of her
work across America around the world
more women are afforded the respect and
opportunities that they deserve but she
also changed how women thought about
themselves and Gloria continues to pour
her heart into teaching and mentoring
her one piece of advice to young girls
is I love this do not listen to my
advice listen to the voice inside you
and follow that when patricia Wald's law
firm asked if she'd come back after
having her first child she said she'd
like some time off to focus on her
family devoted almost ten years to
raising five children but Patricia never
lost the age to practice law so while
her husband watched the kids at home
she'd hit the library on weekends at the
age of 40 she went back to the courtroom
to show the young kids a thing or two as
the first female judge on the DC Circuit
Patricia was a top candidate for
attorney general after leaving the bench
her idea of retirement was to go to the
Hague to preside over the trials of war
criminals Patricia says she hopes enough
woman will become judges that it's not
worth celebrating anymore but today we
celebrate her
and along with Gloria she shows there
were all kinds of paths listening to
your own voice
we salute communicators who shined a
light on stories no one else was telling
a veteran of World War two and more than
a dozen Pacific battles Ben Bradley
brought the same intensity and
dedication to journalism since joining
the Washington Post 65 years ago he
transformed that newspaper into one of
the finest in the world with Ben in
charge
the Post published the Pentagon Papers
revealing the true history of America's
involvement in Vietnam exposed Watergate
unleashed a new era of investigative
journalism holding America's leaders
accountable and reminding us that our
freedom as a nation rests on our freedom
of the press when been retired senator
daniel patrick moynihan put the
admiration of many into a pole a rare
ben bradlee his reign has ceased but his
nation stands its strength increased and
I also indicated to Ben he can pull off
those shirts and I can't
he always looks so cool in him early in
Oprah Winfrey's career her bosses told
her she should change her name to Susie
I have to pause here to say I got the
same advice oh they didn't say I should
be named Susie but they suggested I
should change my name people can relate
to Susie that's what they said it turned
out surprisingly that people could
relate to Oprah just fine in more than
4,500 episodes of her show her message
was always you can you can do and you
can be and you can grow and it can be
better and she was living proof rising
from childhood poverty and abuse to the
pinnacle of the entertainment universe
but even with 40 Emmys the distinction
of being the first black female
billionaire Oprah's greatest strength
has always been her ability to help us
discover the best in ourselves Michelle
and I count ourselves among her many
devoted fans and friends as one of those
fans wrote I didn't know I had a light
in me until Oprah told me it was there
what a great gift
and finally we salute public servants
who strengthened our nation Daniel
Inouye was a humble man and didn't wear
his Medal of Honor very often instead he
liked to wear a pin representing the
Good Conduct Medal he earned as a
teenage private - behave yourself
take special effort he said and I did
not want to dishonor my family Danny
always honored his family and his
country even when his country didn't
always honor him after being classified
as an enemy alien Danny joined a
japanese-american unit that became one
of the most decorated in World War two
and as the second longest serving
senator in American history
he showed a generation of young people
including one kid with a funny name
growing up in Hawaii who noticed that
there was somebody during some of those
hearings in Washington that didn't look
like everybody else which meant maybe I
had a chance to do something important
too he taught all of us that no matter
what you look like or where you come
from this country has a place for
everybody who's willing to serve and
work hard
a proud Hoosier Dick Lugar has served
America for more than half a century
from a young Navy lieutenant to a
respected leader in the United States
Senate I'll always be thankful to dick
for taking me a new junior senator under
his wing including travels together to
review some of his visionary work the
destruction of Cold War arsenals in the
former Soviet Union something that
doesn't get a lot of public notice but
was absolutely critical to making us
safer in the wake of the Cold War now I
should say traveling with dick you get
close to unexploded landmines mortar
shells test tubes filled with anthrax
and the plague his legacy though is the
thousands of missiles and bombers and
submarines and warheads that no longer
threaten us because of his extraordinary
work in our nation in our world are
safer because of this statesman and in a
time of unrelenting partisanship dick
Lugar's decency his commitment to
bipartisan problem-solving stand as a
model of what public service ought to be
now last but never least we honor a
leader who we still remember with such
extraordinary fondness he still
remembers as a child waving goodbye to
his mom tears in her eyes as she went
out to nursing school so she could
provide for her family and I think
lifting up families like his own became
the story of Bill Clinton's life
he remembered what his mom had to do on
behalf of him and he wanted to make sure
that he made life better and easier for
so many people all across the country
but we're struggling in those same ways
and had those same hopes and dreams so
as a governor he transformed education
some more kids could pursue those dreams
as president he proved that with the
right choices you could grow the economy
lift people out of poverty we could
shrink our deficits and still invest in
our families our health our schools
science technology in other words we can
go farther when we look out for each
other and as we've all seen as president
he was just getting started he doesn't
stop he's helped lead relief efforts
after the Asian tsunami Hurricane
Katrina the Haiti earthquake his
foundation and global initiative have
helped to save or improve the lives of
literally hundreds of millions of people
and of course I am most grateful for his
patience during the endless travels of
my Secretary of State
so I'm grateful bill as well for the
advice and counsel that you've offered
me on and off the golf course and and
most importantly for your life-saving
work around the world which represents
what's the very best in America so thank
you so much president
so these are the recipients of the 2013
Presidential Medal of Freedom
these are the men and women who in their
extraordinary lives remind us all of the
beauty of the human spirit the values of
the define us as Americans the potential
that lives inside of all of us I could
not be more happy and more honored to
participate in this ceremony here today
with that what I would like to do is
invite our Anton Reis to just sit there
and let all of us stand and give you a
big round of applause
Hey
hey hey
I guess we should actually give them the
medals though so where are my there here
we go Lee you want to hit it
Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients
Ernie Banks
with an unmatched enthusiasm for
America's pastime Ernie Banks slugged
sprinted and smiled his way into the
record books known to fans as mr. cub he
played an extraordinary 19 seasons with
the Chicago Cubs during which he was
named to 11 all-star teams hit over 500
home runs and won back-to-back Most
Valuable Player honors Ernie Banks was
elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in
1977 and he will forever be known as one
of the finest power hitters and most
dynamic players of all time
Benjamin crowninshield Bradlee
a Titan of journalism Benjamin
crowninshield Bradlee is one of the most
respected news men of his generation
after serving our nation in World War 2
Ben Bradley went on to defend Liberty
here at home testing the limits of a
Free Press
during his tenure as executive editor of
The Washington Post he oversaw coverage
of the Watergate scandal and
successfully challenged the federal
government over the right to publish the
Pentagon Papers his passion for accuracy
and unyielding pursuit of truth continue
to set the standard for journalism
the Honorable William J Clinton
among the finest public servants of our
time president William J Clinton argued
cases for the people of Arkansas served
his state in the governor's mansion and
guided our nation into a new century as
the 42nd president of the United States
Bill Clinton oversaw an era of challenge
and change prosperity and progress his
work after leaving public office
continues to reflect his passionate
unending commitment to improving the
lives and livelihoods of people around
the world in responding to needs both at
home and abroad and as founder of the
Clinton Foundation he has shown that
through creative cooperation among women
and men of goodwill we can solve even
the most intractable problems
Eirene Carano in a way accepting on
behalf of her husband the Honorable
Daniel K in a way a true patriot and
dedicated public servant Daniel K in way
understood the power of leaders when
United in common purpose to protect and
promote the tenants we cherish as
Americans as a member of the revered 440
second regimental combat team Daniel in
way helped free Europe from the grasp of
tyranny during World War two
for which he received the Medal of Honor
representing the people of Hawaii from
the moment the islands joined the Union
he never lost sight of the ideals that
bind us across the 50 states senator in
ways reason and resolve helped make our
country what it is today and for that we
honor him
dr. Daniel Kahneman
Daniel Kahneman's groundbreaking work
earned him a Nobel Prize in Economic
Sciences for his research developing
prospect theory after escaping from
nazi-occupied France as a young boy and
later joining the Israel Defense Forces
dr. Kahneman grew interested in
understanding the origins of people's
beliefs combining psychology and
economic analysis and working alongside
dr. Amos burski dr. Kahneman used simple
experiments to demonstrate how people
make decisions under uncertain
circumstances and he forever changed the
way we view human judgment
the Honorable Richard G lugar
representing the state of Indiana for
over three decades in the United States
Senate Richard G lugar put country above
party and self to forge bipartisan
consensus throughout his time in the
Senate he offered effective solutions to
our national and international problems
advocating for the control of nuclear
arms and other weapons of mass
destruction working with senator Sam
Nunn Richard Lugar established the
nunn-lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction
program one of our country's most
successful national security initiatives
helping to sustain American leadership
and engage nations in collaboration
after decades of confrontation he
remains a strong voice on foreign policy
issues and his informed perspective will
have broad influence for years to come
Loretta Lynn
born a Coal Miner's Daughter Loretta
Lynn has followed a bold path to become
a legend in country music a singer
songwriter and author she has written
dozens of chart-topping songs released
scores of albums and won numerous
accolades breaking barriers in country
music and entertainment
she opened doors for women not only by
winning tremendous achievements but also
by raising issues few dared to discuss
fearlessly telling her own stories with
candor and humor Loretta Lynn has
brought a strong female voice to
mainstream music captured the emotions
of women and men alike and revealed the
common truths about life as it is lived
dr. Mario Molina
the curiosity and creativity that
inspired Mario Molina to convert his
family's bathroom into a laboratory as a
child have driven him through decades of
scientific research born in Mexico
dr. Molina's passion for chemistry
brought him to the United States where
his investigations of
chlorofluorocarbons led to breakthroughs
in our understanding of how they deplete
the ozone layer the impact of his
discoveries extends far beyond his field
affecting Environmental Policy and
fostering international awareness as
well as earning him the 1995 Nobel Prize
in Chemistry today dr. Molina remains a
global leader continuing to study air
quality climate change and the
environment that connects us all
Tam O'Shaughnessy accepting on behalf of
her life partner dr. Sally kay ride
thirty years ago dr. Sally K Ride soared
into space as the youngest American and
first woman to wear the Stars and
Stripes above Earth's atmosphere as an
astronaut she sought to keep America at
the forefront of space exploration as a
role model she fought tirelessly to
inspire young people especially girls to
become scientifically literate and to
pursue careers in science technology
engineering and math at the end of her
life she became an inspiration for those
battling pancreatic cancer and for the
lesbian gay bisexual and transgender
community the tale of a quiet hero Sally
Ride story demonstrates that the sky is
no limit for those who dream of reaching
for the stars
Walter Nagel accepting on behalf of his
partner Byard Rustin
Bayard Rustin was a giant in the
American civil rights movement openly
gay at a time when many had to hide who
they loved his unwavering belief that we
are all equal members of a single human
family took him from his first freedom
ride to the lesbian gay bisexual and
transgender rights movement thanks to
his unparalleled skills as an organizer
progress that once seemed impossible
appears in retrospect to have been
inevitable 50 years after the march on
Washington he organized America honors
Byard Rustin as one of its greatest
architects for social change and a
fearless advocate for its most
vulnerable citizens
or Toro Sandoval
Arturo Sandoval is one of the world's
finest jazz musicians born into poverty
in Cuba and held back by his government
he risked everything to share his gifts
with the world eventually defecting with
help from Dizzy Gillespie his mentor and
friend in the decades since this
astonishing trumpeter pianist and
composer has inspired audiences in every
corner of the world and awakened a new
generation of great performers he
remains one of the best ever to play
Linnea Smith accepting on behalf of her
husband Dean e Smith
Dean Smith spent 36 seasons taking
college basketball to new heights as
head coach at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill he led his team
to 11 Final Fours two national titles
and 879 victories retiring as the
winningest men's college basketball
coach in history Dean Smith brought the
same commitment to supporting his
players off the court
he helped more than 96% of his letterman
graduate and in an era of deep division
he taught players to overcome bigotry
with courage and compassion he will
forever stand as one of the greatest
coaches in college basketball history
Gloria Steinem
a trailblazing writer and feminist
organizer Gloria Steinem has been at the
forefront of the fight for equality and
social justice for more than four
decades instrumental to a broad range of
initiatives and issues from establishing
MS magazine and take our daughters to
work day to pushing for women's self
empowerment and an end to sex
trafficking
she has promoted lasting political and
social change in America and abroad
through her reporting and speaking she
has shaped debates on the intersection
of sex and race brought critical
problems to national attention and
forged new opportunities for women in
media Gloria Steinem continues to move
us all to take up the cause of reaching
for a more just tomorrow
Reverend Ct Vivian
equipped only with courage and an
overwhelming commitment to social
justice the Reverend Ct Vivian was a
stalwart activist on the march toward
racial equality whether at a lunch
counter on a Freedom Ride or behind the
bars of a prison cell he was unafraid to
take bold action in the face of fierce
resistance by pushing change through
nonviolent demonstration and advocacy Ct
Vivian established and led numerous
organizations to support underserved
individuals and communities his legacy
of combating injustice will shine as an
example for generations to come
Patricia McGowan Wald
Patricia McGowan Wald made history as
the first woman appointed to the United
States Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia Circuit rising to chief
judge of the court she always strove to
better understand the law and fairly
apply it after leaving federal service
judge Wald helped Institute standards
for justice and the rule of law at the
International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia in The Hague hailed as
a model judge she laid a foundation for
countless women within the legal
profession and helped unveil the
humanity within the law
Oprah G Winfrey
Oprah G Winfrey is a global media icon
when she launched the Oprah Winfrey Show
in 1986 there were few women and even
fewer women of color with the national
platform to discuss the issues and
events shaping our times but over the 25
years that followed Oprah Winfrey's and
Nate gift for tapping into our most
fervent hopes and deepest fears drew
millions of viewers across every
background making her show the
highest-rated talk show in television
history
off screen Oprah Winfrey has used her
influence to support underserved
communities and to lift up the lives of
young people especially young women
around the world in her story we are
reminded that no dream can be deferred
when we refuse to let life's obstacles
keep us down
little Freedom honorees please
all right well the that concludes the
formal part of today's ceremony I want
to thank all of you for being here
obviously we are deeply indebted to
those who we honor here today and we're
going to have an opportunity to take
some pictures with the honorees and
their family members the rest of you I
understand the food here is pretty good
so I hope you enjoy the reception and I
hope we carry away from this a reminder
of what JFK understood to be the essence
of the American spirit that it's
represented here and some of us may be
less talented but we all have the
opportunity to to serve and to open
people's hearts and minds you know in
our smaller orbits so I hope everybody's
been inspired as I have been
participating and being with these
people here today thank you very much
everybody